Hello children!
[Applause]
Today
I'm going to share with you
about friendship.
Do you want friends? Do
you prefer good friends or bad friends?
Has anyone here read the
Doraemon story?
[Applause]
In the story, Doraemon
has pairs of friends. Which friends? Which friends?
Raise your hand! There are
many friends, but let's prioritize the
male friend. That's the male friend with the highest raised arm over
there. [
Applause]
[Music]
Very nice. Sleeping during the day. Thank you. Let's give him a
round of applause!
Children, you remember the story very well. Does
anyone else remember?
Nobita used to sneak away from his mother to play, skip housework,
or borrow Doraemon's gadgets to do bad things, right?
That means he skipped housework, went out to play, and
borrowed Doraemon's gadgets to do
bad things, right? Now, who remembers
the story where Nobita borrowed
Doraemon's gadgets to do bad things?
What was that thing? My dear,
Nobita is a very weak friend who often goes out to
play. He's bullied by me and Gian, so...
Nobita and Doraemon often borrow gadgets to get
revenge. Let's try a revenge story.
Once, Nobita was bullied by Gian and chased by Suneo, so he
borrowed a gadget to reverse
Gian's attack and catch him. So, it was Gian and Suneo
borrowing a gadget to let Gian bully them, and
then drying them out, right? Is that right, everyone? Who
thinks so? Let's give a round of applause!
Thank you! So, our Nobita
is very shy,
lazy, sleeps a lot, is a poor student, and
what else? That's all
we've been telling about
Nobita's bad points. Now, does Nobita have
any good points? At
10 years old,
Nobita is very kind and always helps
people. Nobita is very kind and always
helps people. Right, kids?
Hooray! Nobita has a very good quality!
Now, let's move on to
other characters in
this friendship story. Now, let's talk about the personalities
of the
boys.
Wow, so many hands! So
many hands!
You're all so good!  Children, reading
Doraemon stories to learn about friendship is
very interesting, isn't it? My
name is Linh, I
live in a mountain cave.
Chaien's personality is that he often bullies
other friends,
often beats up Nobita,
teases
Suneo, and takes Suneo's things.
That's Chaien, he's a bully. He
bullies Nobita, right? He
teases and takes Suneo's things, right?
That's right. So what other personality traits does Chaien have?
[Music]
Chaien treats his friends badly, but he
loves and cherishes his younger sister very much.
That is,
he loves his father's younger sister very much, right?
Thank you. Sit down. Is there
anyone here who often bullies their friends but
loves their siblings? Raise your
hand! Tell me a story about someone who often
bullies their friends but loves their siblings. My
story? Back in my hometown, I often see
younger siblings. I'm very fond of them at school.
But when I go home, I
cherish my older sisters more.
So, at school, you used to bully your
classmates. But why do you love your sister so much?
Why don't you bully her?
Because when you were little, your sister always comforted you when you cried. That means when you were
little, you cried a lot, so your sister always comforted you, so now you do
n't bully her, you love her, right? So, if someone bullies your sister now, what will you do? You will protect your sister. Ah, yes, you will protect your sister. So, here, I'll teach you this: you love your sister very much,
and your friends also
love their sisters very much.
If anyone bullies your sister,
you will protect her. Protecting means
fighting, that means being nosy,
right? So, if you keep
bullying others, when they
come to protect your sister, we'll see them
fighting. Is that okay? Is that fun? No. Okay, stop doing that
from now on.
Thank you.
So, we now know another character,
Chaien. And about cars,
many of you know about Seiko.
Tran Binh Minh...  The brown squirrel group and the child from
Bac Giang province... that child is always
boasting, and both of them are always showing off. They always brag, they always show
off, and what
else? And they always
think they're right, always
boasting. They always think they're right, and then they say
thank you, hello
friend, let's give a round of applause! Besides the car, what other virtues does the chicken have? My name is Le Truong Giang. I'm from the pearl group and I'm from Hanoi. And they also bully Nobita with their father,
right? Arrogant and always asking others to bully Nobita, right
children? Yes, let's
give them a round of applause! You're so good! Now, who remembers a story about Xeko, who was very arrogant? Once, when he was born, Nobita gave Xeko a small airplane,
and Xeko was showing off his airplane collection.
Right, children? That's a
very good story. In that
story, he
always tells Gian to collect
Nobita's things, like in Nobita
's stories.
Is that right?  No, kids, let's give a
round of applause!
[Applause]
Now let's go back to
our character Doraemon.
Doraemon has magical bags, and
what can Doraemon do with them?
[Music]
Doraemon has a magical bag with
gadgets: a door, a magnifying flashlight, a
translation bread, a
miniature army, and a bamboo drum. Is that
enough, kids?
[Music]
Okay, let's give a round of applause! Now let's
volunteer to add more!
My name is Nguyen Phu Duy Hieu, I'm
from Hanoi.
[Applause]
How many gadgets are there? So
many, I can't even count them! In
short, it's more than 1000! That's too many to
count, kids! Just now you
said that it can do anything,
so that's enough, right? Have
you ever seen a
bag of gadgets that can't do
anything? Never? Okay,
thank you, kids. Now we'll go
to each character's personality one by one.
First, Nobita
Nobita sleeps during the day, is
lazy in studying, and is
shy, right children?
Let's see who is similar to Nobita in
what ways. Children, those of you who sleep a lot during the
day, raise your hands!
Thank you, children. So, those of you who
are shy, raise your hands! Raising your hands helps you be
less shy!
Now, one of you raise your hand, and then
tell me a story about being shy. Let me and your
classmates hear it. Who is
shy?
Tell me a story about being shy! "
Hello teacher! My name is Pham Ngan.
Once, during the class meeting in grade 4, I
forgot my bag at home. I was
so shy that I didn't dare tell
anyone. Then the teachers
noticed, and they had to tell
my mother, so they were able to get my bag. Are there any other
shy children
like that?" "
Teacher, my name is Vu Thanh Tung, I'm
from the White Rabbit group." "I have a
story. I was sitting under a tree..."
There was a worm that fell on
my head, I was so scared I ran away. Yes, I ran
away! Let's give a round of applause!
So we have two stories about
shyness. One story is about a child who
forgot their notebook at home but didn't dare
tell the teacher, so the teacher had to ask, and
then the mother brought the notebook to the child. So, do
you want to be less shy? Are you
sad? The
other story is about a child who had a worm fall on their head and was so scared they ran away. Now, I will share with you some things to help you be less shy. First,
things that we don't dare talk about have happened, haven't they? They have
happened, right? Like the child who
forgot their notebook, it has happened. Now,
when it happens, we have to find a
way to face it and
deal with it. That's what
makes us less shy. For example, if
you see a worm fall on your head,
you're so scared you run away. Running away
is also a way of dealing with it.
Do you understand the place where the worm fell on your head?  So, let's
continue our story about friendship.
You see, when
Nobita
is shy and lazy in his studies, how does Doraemon
usually help him? And when
he's often bullied, how does Doraemon
help him? "Hello, teacher. My
name is Nguyen Quang Anh. I'm from Quang Yen, I'm from the
Zebra group." "Yes, teacher, Doraemon gave
Nobita a gadget.
Giving the gadget solved everything,
right? If it did
n't solve everything,
what else did Nobita have to do? With that gadget, he could have
helped. Does anyone know?" "
Hello, teacher." "Yes, teacher,
Nobita forgot to read the instructions
before using the gadget." "That means you
have to read the instructions, but you didn't
read them, and you used it yourself, and that's right! He
ruined the gadget! He ruined the whole
story! That's right,
children!
Thank you!" Let's
give a round of applause to show our
appreciation for your excellent memory.
Now, I will share more.  Regarding
this friendship,
our Nobita
is very shy,
clumsy, sleeps a lot, is
lazy in studying, and isn't very smart,
right? But Nobita
has one characteristic: he's
kind and always helps his friends, right?
And because of his kind heart and willingness to help
others, that's why
Doraemon helps him. Nobita has
that kind of personality, so
Doraemon appears to help him.
As for Gian, he's always bullying
everyone, so he doesn't have any good people to
help him. He's very arrogant, thinking he's from a
rich family, right? He always talks to people
and asks Gian to bully
others, so he doesn't have a good person
like Doraemon to befriend him from the beginning,
right?
Do you see that the friendship between Nobita
and Doraemon is a good friendship?
Nobita is always helped by Doraemon,
right?
So, in return for that kindness,
when did Nobita help Doraemon?
Remember when Doraemon's
machine broke down inside him? What did Nobita do?
Can you tell me the story?
Nobita crawled inside Doraemon to
fix it for him.
Doraemon... I think I remember
hearing that he risked his life, right? Yes,
thank you. Let's give him a round of
applause! Do
you think Nobita is a good friend?
Nobita is often helped by Doraemon,
but when Doraemon was in trouble, Nobita did
n't hesitate to risk his life to
save his friend, right? So,
these two good friends care for each other, don't they?
Later, because of Doraemon's help,
what kind of person did Nobita become? Let's hear your opinions. Did
Doraemon help Nobita change his personality? Did he change his habit of
sleeping or being inactive?
Did
Nobita become a better person? Let's
tell a story!
[Applause]
Nobita has changed. Nobita has
become a good person. He saved
Doraemon and protected him. Is he studious?
Yes. Does he get high grades? And does he
still sleep during the day?
What else has he changed?
Who knows?
Let's give him a round of applause!
Thank you. My
name is Tran Tam. I'm from
Thanh Hoa and I'm in the dolphin group.
In the Doraemon story, I watched
the last episode where Doraemon's machine
broke down and Nobita couldn't find a
repairman. Nobita tried hard to study,
and when he became good at studying, he
repaired Doraemon's machine. And when he fixed it,
the two met. That's
great! Let's give a round of applause
for the friendship between Doraemon and Nobita.
Thank you. You see, children, Doraemon
helped Nobita. Then, when
Nobita's machine broke down,
Doraemon tried hard to study hard,
right children?
Right, so he could fix
Doraemon's machine.
So, we see...  Beautiful friendships,
children! Do you want to have a
friendship like Nobita and Doraemon's? A
beautiful friendship is one where you help
each other,
helping each other
to become better people, right? It's about
overcome shyness, laziness, and become more
studious. That's right, Nobita
changed like that, didn't he?
Now, among you, who has
such a friend?
Many of you have
good friends, thank you! Now, let's
try to cherish those friendships, which means we must always
listen to our friends, right? Let's look at what our friends are lacking,
what we have good qualities to help them with,
and what they have good qualities to learn from.
Now, let's turn to the friendship between Gian and
Suneo. Do you see how close Gian and Suneo are? If
so, what do they usually do together?
What do close friends usually do together?
Ngo Minh Quan, from the White Rabbit group,
answers: I am Gian and Suneo. We
often go on trips together.
He bullies Nobita and Gian, and
often invites Son to come along
to listen to his terrible singing voice.
Does he like it? Does he
like listening to
Gian sing? No, he doesn't. He doesn't like
listening to singing, right?
Thank you, let's give him a round of
applause.
You see, my boyfriend is the one who often
hits people, right? He's the
one who always thinks he's right,
relying on his rich family. These two friends
play together, but they
always make each other uncomfortable,
right? My boyfriend
makes my friend listen to his singing. Has he ever
made my friend listen to his
singing? My friend
doesn't like listening to it, right?
So these two friends
have bad personalities. Two
bad friends playing together will bring
each other suffering, right?
Do you like friendships
like the friendship between my dad and Gian? If you don't
like this kind of friendship,
what personality traits should you get rid of? Who can tell me? I
want to have a friendship without one.  So,
what personality traits do we need to get rid of?
Teacher, we need to get rid of
arrogance, bullying,
and
bossiness. Let's
give her a round of applause! That means we do
n't want to have
bad friendships, we don't want to have
friendships that bring us
unwanted things, so
we need to get rid of arrogance,
bossiness, or bullying, right
children?
Right?
So, which of you have ever been arrogant?
Raise your hand so I can see. There are quite a
few!
Okay, thank you children. Now, put your hands down. Which of you have been
bossy or bullied? Raise your
hands! From today onwards, do
you still want to have bad friends? Will you get
rid of those personality traits?
Who wants to volunteer to get
rid of those traits from today?
Raise your hand! Who wants to get
rid of arrogance,
arrogance, or bullying? Raise your
hands!  "You're all so
good children! From now
on, we won't play with
arrogant people anymore, and we won't hack anymore. Let's
raise our hands!
We won't play with arrogant and
bossy people anymore! Thank you, children.
From now on, we must find
good friends. And to find
good friends like Xeko and Nobita,
we must know how to love and
help others. If we help others,
we will have good friends, right?
Children, I'll repeat this:
firstly,
to have good friends, we
must
[music] [music]
[music]
[music].
If we want to practice love at home, we
will help our grandparents and parents with chores, and when
our parents or grandparents are sick, we will
bring them medicine or massage their hands and feet so they can get
better. Do you
have siblings? Yes, I have a sister. So,
if I love my sister, how should I treat
her? I will help her when
she is sick and help her with housework.
Thank you, children. Let's give her a
round of applause!" the teacher
reminded them.  Now, if we want to have
good friends like Doraemon, you
children must cultivate a loving and helpful heart. At
home, you must help your grandparents and parents with
housework, help your siblings with
housework,
and when your parents,
grandparents, or siblings are sick, you must
help them, right? So now, at
school, if you want to cultivate a
loving and helpful heart, how do you do it?
Raise your hand if you can think of anything. And also,
help your teachers with everything. That
is, a specific example: if at
school you want to cultivate a loving and helpful heart,
how do you do it through actions?
What specific things do you do? You will help your classmates with their
daily chores, and help the
teachers with their teaching materials and things like that.
You're very good, aren't you? You can
practice this by helping your classmates with their daily chores even when it's not your
turn. Is
n't that loving and helping?
Then, help the teacher carry the teaching materials and
equipment. And does anyone else have any other
ideas?  We can do things
in class to
cultivate a loving and helpful heart.
Think of something you can do!
We can find students who are
hurt and advise them with
positive things. *Applause* That's great,
children! It's a very
noble act of help, children.
It means finding out who is hurt or
sad and advising them with positive things. Is
n't that wonderful? It's
amazing! Thank you
so much, you're so clever! That's the spirit of Buddhism, my child. It's very good, very precious. Now, can
anyone think of
something else we can do in class to
cultivate a loving and helpful heart? "
Hello teacher. My name is
Hoang Minh Phuc, I'm from Ha Long, Quang
Ninh, and I'm in the Pearl group." *
Hooray!* "
If I see my friends
fighting, I'll go and intervene and
resolve the conflict." "
Can a little girl like me do that?" "I've
done it many times at school." "
Have you ever been hit back?"
No, not at all. Oh, you're so good! Hooray!
Clap, hooray! Look, children, you
see! You're so small!
Do you see your friends? But you help them
by... If you see them fighting or
having conflicts, you step in to intervene and you've never
been hit. This is your good fortune,
you have that kind heart, so you're blessed.
Maybe some kind of Doraemon is
helping you, right children?
Right? Surely, with such a good heart,
you'll have some invisible Doraemon
helping you, otherwise,
how could someone so small do that?
Are you afraid when you go to intervene when your friends are fighting or arguing?
You're all so good! So today
we have another way:
when we see your friends having conflicts, fighting, or disagreements,
we
advise them. Is there anyone else who wants to
cultivate
a loving and helpful heart at
school? Let me give you a look. My name is
Nguyen Hung Anh, I
'm in the Coral group, and I
help everyone.
Who among you is on duty to help me carry the school supplies? Do
you let your classmates copy your work? That's
great, children! You
see, in acts of
love and help, we don't
include letting someone copy your work.
Do you understand?
If you let your classmates copy your work, is that showing
love or not showing love?
Which statement
is correct? [Music] In my class, I'm in the Zebra class, and I'm from Hai Phong. At school, I help my classmates with their studies, especially those who are weaker than me. Hong, I will explain the
lessons to them. That means you help your classmates so they can learn. How do you help them? I will
explain the lessons so they understand better.
Have you let your classmates copy your work? That's
great! Hooray! Who will
praise you for helping your classmates?
If your classmates don't understand the lesson,
you will explain it again so
they understand. You see...
Let's
give another round of applause to
praise those who are
so good! And which of you have other ways to
cultivate a loving and helpful heart at
school? My
name is Nguyen Van Nhi, I am
10 years old and I am from the Coral class. I
often help my friends with
difficult assignments and explain things to them so they
understand. That's
great!
Now let's give her a
round of applause! Children, do you think it's
easy to cultivate a loving and helpful heart at school? Let's
list them together: First, helping your
classmate with their daily chores. Can you do that?
Second, helping the teacher with
everything when she needs to carry things and do
teaching tasks. Can you do that?
Third, intervening when you see your classmates arguing.
Can you do that? Fourth, comforting your
classmates when they are sad or
hurt.
Can you do that?
[Applause]
Fifth, if we see a classmate who doesn't understand the
lesson,
we explain it again and discuss it with them.
To help you understand if you can do it, and for
those who haven't, try these 5 things,
okay? And what about the methods? Anyone
who has any ideas, let's talk.
We have 5
ways now.
Hello teacher! My name is Thu Anh, I'm
from the Brown Squirrel Group. I
can help you manage the class when you're away.
That is, when I help you manage the class when you're
away, I'll tell you about a time I managed the
class. Did I encounter a difficult situation? Tell me about one
situation.
And the class president
asked me to go to the front of the class and check on the
students in the row. But those students were very
difficult to manage. But I told them
to study and
do their homework so that when I came in, we could correct their work, so they
agreed. And
those who didn't agree... Did any of them
react negatively or hate me?
Only one or two. And later,
did they stop hating me?
Or did they become my friends? That's
great! Hooray!
So, in this story, we
see that later, Chaien and the girl become friends
with Nobita. No, they don't.
Nobita and Doraemon become
good friends. These good friends reformed
Chaien and made the girl and the
boy become good people, just
like the story of Ha Thu Anh.
You were in charge of the class, and the students were very difficult to
manage, but you tried your best to tell them to
study and do their homework so that when the teacher
came, they could correct their work immediately. There were a few
students who didn't like it,
but in the end, your
perseverance in managing the class and
your kindness made those two students
become your friends. We
see the ending is similar to the story
of Doraemon and Nobita, and Saiko and
Chaien, right? Let's give you
a round of applause!
So, we have summarized six
things we want in class. If we
cultivate a loving and
helpful heart, we will do those six things,
and these six things will help us to
have good people.  Long-lasting friendships, children, do you
understand?
If you
have good friends, you must
maintain and cultivate a kind heart, helping and loving at
home and in class, then you will have a
long-lasting friendship, and you will also
influence those who are not good to
become good friends. Do you
want that?
And we will have another lesson about
friendship: firstly,
we must not be arrogant, show off,
or be aggressive, do you
understand?
If we are aggressive and
arrogant, we will always encounter
bad friends, right? You and
those bad friends will always
harm each other, right?
Remember, I
repeat:
we don't want bad friendships
because bad friends will bully each other and
force each other to do things
we don't want to do, right? Right? Okay?
And if we don't want
bad friends, we will get
rid of arrogance and aggression, right?
So, in this retreat, has anyone
met a friend who likes this role yet? No, no.
Have you seen any of you in this retreat bumping into each
other? If
you see that, do you tell your friend to stop? Do
you
tell them? Do you
understand? And you
must get rid of that aggressive behavior. Those of
you who still have that behavior at home and at this retreat must get
rid of it. Do you agree? Yes, yes! Ho ho!
How about that? Do you
agree?
Today we've learned how to make
friends. Let go of bad friends, let
go of your bad habits so you don't meet
bad friends, and let's develop and
cultivate our good qualities of
love and helping others.
Love and help both at home and at school
so we can have beautiful friendships. Do you
agree? If you
agree, what do you say?
[Music]
Extremely... thinking...
yeah! Yes, you're all very good! Today I'm
sharing with you the story of
Doraemon. You've read it, and
today, through that story, we
learned how to find new and good friendships, and
we'll learn how to let go.  Let's move on from
bad friends and bad qualities, right
children? And for those of you who
have a best friend,
tell us stories about how
you usually treat each other, how you help each other
when your friend is sad, how you
help each other with studies, how you help
each other with good deeds. Tell us a
story! Yes, let me introduce myself. I'm a student
from the Golden Bee class. I have a
friend I've been playing with since I was
3 years old, that's 9 years now.
Every time she's in trouble, I
help her. I
remember she often gives me
her favorite things. We
often help each other,
play together, and
help each other study well. Yes,
she's very good at studying, and whenever I
don't know something, I ask her.
Congratulations, you have a good friend! And do you
help each other and tell each other to obey our
parents? Yes, she's very well-behaved. Have
you ever been naughty and she
reminded you to be better?
No, we just play together.  We're close friends, and we're
both well-behaved, and we rarely
misbehave. You see, children,
good friends meet other
good friends, right? Two good people meet and
become good friends, and their
friendship lasts a long time, always
doing good things for each other. Do you
feel happy and joyful with this friendship?
Yes, I'm very happy. I hope
this friendship lasts even longer. From
tomorrow onwards, will you do
more things to
cultivate a loving and helpful heart? Yes,
I will! Let's give you a round of
applause! Thank you so much! That
's an example of a good friendship. A
beautiful friendship that we should all learn from. Now, let's invite the
boy
to share his beautiful friendship with everyone.
This year I'm 11 years old, I'm in the panda group.
My friendship started when I was three years old, when I was in
kindergarten with a girl, and now I've been friends with
her for 10 years.
That's a friendship from kindergarten! It's
been 10 years already! So, I...
[Music]
[Applause]
We were walking, we were playing
outside in the schoolyard, and
some friends came and teased and bullied us. Then a friend came to
help and protected us.
From elementary school to middle school,
we've been very shy and weak, and that friend
is the only one who has protected us.
Thank you, my child.
So, you will repay
that friend's kindness by trying your best and working hard.
Do you understand? Try hard so that
you can have the ability to
benefit yourself. Sometimes, when
your friend is in difficulty, you should help them.
And you should also cultivate a
loving and helpful heart so that you
can have many close friends and help
many people. Thank you, my
dear children. Today, I shared with
you about the topic of friendship. I see that
you have a
very deep understanding of friendship in the Doraemon story, and you are also
conscious of finding and making friends.  I
promise that from tomorrow I will
change my character,
transforming my bad traits into
good ones. This is very valuable. Once again, I
wish you all the best in building
good friendships. Do you agree?
[Applause] Yes,
you all did very well! Today's sharing session
ends here.
[Music]